# <h1 style="text-align:center">Server Message Block</h1>

## Introduction

```SMB (Server Message Block)``` is a client-server communication protocol used for sharing access to files, printers, serial ports and other resources on a network. It is often found on Windows machines providing vertical/lateral movement. Network file shares may contain sensitive data, and versions of ```SMB``` may be vulnerable. ```SMB``` allows users and admins to share folders and make them accessible remotely. These shares often have sensitive information (such as passwords). Use ```smbclient``` to enumerate and interact with ```SMB```.

## Tools

* ```enum4linux``` - complete enumeration.
* ```smbclient``` - SMB client to access resources on servers.

## Helpful Commands

* ```smbclient -N -L \\\<target_IP>``` - retrieve a list of available shares on the remote host (```-L```) and suppress the password prompt (```-N```).
* ```smbclient \\\\<target_IP>\\<sharename>``` - attempt to connect as a specific user after getting names fo the available shares. 
* ```smbclient -U <username> \\\\<target_IP>\\<sharename>``` - attempt to login with given username (will result in password prompt). 


## Enumeration

###  ```enum4linux```
```enum4linux``` is used to enumerate SMB shares on Windows/Linux. 

    enum4linux [options] <target_IP>

    -U          // get userlist
    -M          // get machine list
    -N          // get namelist dump (diff than -U, -M)
    -S          // get sharelist
    -P          // get password policy info
    -G          // get group and member list
    -a          // all of the above

### ```smbclient```
```smbclient```allows you to access resources on servers.

    smbclient //<target_IP>/<SHARE> [options]

    -U [name]: to specify the user
    -p [port]: to specify the port

Example:

    smbclient //10.10.10.1/secret -U admin -p 139

* ```smb-os-discovery``` - script that attempts to determine OS, computer name, domain, workgroup, etc. - see https://nmap.org/nsedoc/scripts/smb-os-discovery.html.

    ```nmap --script smb-os-discovery.nse -p445 <target_IP>```


## Vulnerabilities

* ```EternalBlue``` - https://www.avast.com/c-eternalblue

## See Also

```smbclient```, ```enum4linux```, 