# <h1 style="text-align:center">Network File System</h1>

## Introduction
NFS allows a system to share directories and files with others over a network. Users can access files on a remote system as if they were local files. This is achieved by mounting all, or a portion of the filesystem on a server. That information can then be accessed with appropriate credentials.

[Oracle Technical Explanation](https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19683-01/816-4882/6mb2ipq7l/index.html)

First, the client will request to mount a directory from a remote host on a local directory just the same way it can mount a physical device. The mount service will then act to connect to the relevant mount daemon using RPC.

The server checks if the user has permission to mount whatever directory has been requested. It will then return a file handle which uniquely identifies each file and directory that is on the server.

If someone wants to access a file using NFS, an RPC call is placed to NFSD (the NFS daemon) on the server. This call takes parameters such as:

 The file handle
 The name of the file to be accessed
 The user's, user ID
 The user's group ID

These are used in determining access rights to the specified file. This is what controls user permissions, I.E read and write of files.

## Enumerating NFS

NFS-Common - this package is important to have installed on any machine that uses NFS (either as client or server). It contains several programs (e.g. ```locd```, ```statd```, ```showmount```, etc.) We are concerned with ```showmount``` and ```mount.nfs```. NFS-Common can be installed via:

    sudo apt install nfs-common

After conducting a port scan (```nmap -A -p- <ip_address>```), we can create a folder or directory which will be used as a mount point. You can then connect the NFS share to the mount point on your system:

    mkdir /tmp/mount    // create temporary directory to mount fs

    sudo mount -t nfs IP:share /tmp/mount/ -nolock

Note the following:

* ```sudo``` - run as root
* ```mount``` - execute the mount command
* ```-t nfs``` - type of device to mount, then specifying that its NFS
* ```IP:share``` - the ip address of the NFS server, and the name of the share we wish to mount
* ```-nolock``` - specifies not to use NLM locking

## Exploiting NFS

Something called ```root_squash``` is enabled by default on NFS shares, which prevents anyone connecting from having root access to the NFS volume. Remote users are assigned a user 'nfsnobody' when connecting. If this can be disabled, you can create SUID bit files which allow remote user root access to the system.

This sounds complicated, but really- provided you're familiar with how SUID files work, it's fairly easy to understand. We're able to upload files to the NFS share, and control the permissions of these files. We can set the permissions of whatever we upload, in this case a bash shell executable. We can then log in through SSH, as we did in the previous task- and execute this executable to gain a root shell!

Due to compatibility reasons, we'll use a standard Ubuntu Server 18.04 bash executable, the same as the server's- as we know from our nmap scan. You can download it here. If you want to download it via the command line, be careful not to download the github page instead of the raw script. You can use wget https://github.com/polo-sec/writing/raw/master/Security%20Challenge%20Walkthroughs/Networks%202/bash.

