<h1 style="text-align:center"> Chapter 4: Social Engineering and Password Attacks</h1>

# Social Engineering and Human Vectors

Social Engineering attacks focus on the human side of information security. `Social engineering` is manipulation. It relies on human reactions. We are most vulnerable when we are responding instead of thinking clearly. Usually, more successful attacks will incorporate several of these principals at the same time. Key principals include:

1. `Authority` - people will obey someone in charge or knowledgable. Claiming to be a manager or other person of authority.
2. `Intimidataion` - scaring or bullying an individual into taking a desired action.
3. `Consensus-based` - people tend to want to do what others are doing to presuade them to take an action (`social proof`). Pointing out that everyone has 'clicked' a link or is using a product.
4. `Scarcity` - making something look more desirable because it may be the last one available.
5. `Familiarity` - relies on liking the individual or organization the attacker is claiming to represent.
6. `Trust` - relies on a connection with the individual.
7. `Urgency` - creating a feeling that action must be taken quickly for some reason.

## Social Engineering Techniques

### Pishing

`Phishing` is the fraudulent acquisition of information, often focused on credentials as well as personal information (credit cards). Often done via email, but also via text or phone. `Spear phishing` targets specific individuals or groups. `Whaling` targets specific people, usually senior employees like CEOs or CFOs.

The best defense is awareness and teaching people how to respond. Staging periodic exercises are also good. Technical means like filtering using reputation tools, keyword / text pattern matching, etc. also help detect attacks in emails / phone / texts.

### Vishing

`Vishing` is phishing via voice or voicemail messages. Requests to help someone in another country, to send funds, tax scams, threats of law enforcment actions, requests to do something for senior staff. Relies on a sense of urgency due to imminent threat.

### Smishing

`Smishing` is phishing via text, such as clicking on a link in a text message. Rely on similar pretexts as other phishing attacks to build trust or urgency or authority.

### Misinformation and Disinformation

`Misinformation and Disinformation` attacks often come with online influence campaigns focused on social media, email, or other online mediums. `Misinformation` is incorrect information, resulting from getting facts wrong. `Disinformation` is incorrect, inaccurate, or outright false information. `Malinformation` is based on fact, but used out of context to mislead, harm, or manipulate.

The five-step `TRUST` process to counter misinformation and disinformation:

1. Tell your story.
2. Ready your team.
3. Understand and assess MDM.
4. Strategize response.
5. Track outcomes.

### Impersonation

`Impersonation` is pretending to be someone else. It uses the willingness of the target to believe the impersonator.

### Business Email Compromises

`Business Email Compromises (BEC)` relies on using legitimate email addresses to conduct scams and other attacks. Types of attacks include invoice scams, gift card scams, data theft, and account compromise/account access attacks. May be called `Email Account Compromise (EAC)`. These attacks can use:

- compromised accounts.
- sending spoofed emails.
- using common fake but similar domain techniques.
- using malware or other tools.

Mitigate with multifactor authentication, awareness training, and policies that help support appropriate use and behaviors.

### Pretexting

`Pretexting` is the process of using a made-up scenario to justify why you are approaching an individual. Often used as part of impersonation efforts to make them seem more believable. A verification call can help defend against this.

### Watering Hole Attacks

`Watering Hole Attacks` use websites that targets frequent to attack them. These sites can then be compromised by targeting the site or deploying malware through other means such as an advertising network.

### Brand Impersonation

`Brand Impersonation` or brand spoofing, uses emails that are intended to appear to be from a legitimate brand relying on name recognition and even using email templates used by the brand itself. Often used to get users to log into their existing accounts. They may request payment or gather passwords / sensitive information, or have malware.

### Typosquatting

`Typosquatting` uses misspelled and slightly off but similar site URLs to conduct typosquatting attacks. A related attack is `pharming`, which relies either on changing the system's host file or an active malware on the system that changes the system's DNS servers, redirecting them to a lookalike site.

# Password Attacks

`Brute-force attacks` iterate through passwords until they find one that works. `Password spraying attacks` are a form of brute-force attacks that attempt to use a single password or small set of passwords against many accounts. Can be effective if you know that a target uses a specific default password or a set of passwords. `Dictionary Attacks` uses a list of words for their attack attempts. Brute force attacks try all possible combinations of characters while dictionary attacks use a predefined list of likely passwords.

Multi-factor authentication is a good defense. Not storing passwords and instead using well-constructed password hashes to verify passwords at login are a good method. `Salting` adds a unique string to the password to be hashed. `Peppering` is another method.

###### Online vs Offline

These attacks can occur against a online system or a offline 'captured password store'. `Rainbow tables` can be used against a captured hashed password. They are searchable databases of precomputed hashes using the same hasing methodology as the captured password file.

# Summary

b, d, a, c, b, a, d, b, b, a, c, b, c, c, c, d, b, b, b, c

b, d, a, c, b, a, d, b, b, a, c, b, c, c, c, d, b, b, b, c
